---
layout: post
title: How to actually read technical books?
date: 2026-09-22 21:00:00 +0500
---
Personally, I haven’t had many problems with reading. I read popular science books from time to time, but I’ve always struggled for years when it came to reading technical books. Then I tried another approach, and that’s what has boosted my interest in diving deep into my field recently. I hope this happens for you too after reading this. If it has already started, you’re probably way ahead of me, and please share this with younger folks you know who are currently facing difficulties building a successful career.

The first technical book I ever picked up about programming was probably about Java by Oracle Edition. I couldn’t believe that our university library had this book in its original version, and I decided to become a pro in the Java language. I read for the first few days, but I couldn’t grasp anything. It’s insane that this happened almost four years ago. I stuck to the wrong path of reading such books for over four years. No surprise I’m not at a top-notch IT company right now.

After failing with Java, I printed out a pirated version of Kotlin in Action. I thought, now I’ll be disciplined, plan everything ahead, and understand one topic at a time. It can be difficult, but I must put in the effort if I ever want to become a professional. I stopped reading the next day. I just kept working on local small startup projects.

I kept believing the main reason was my lack of discipline, not taking it seriously enough, poor planning, etc. The more I blamed myself, the less interested I became in learning. I loved every article that blamed frameworks and languages due to their design mistakes, with my limited understanding of what was actually going on. (I still like to read them, but that’s another topic.) I thought they also added another layer of difficulty for beginners.

What changed after years of blaming myself was when I set aside only one hour to understand a chapter, as I did before. But this time, I gave myself the option to move on to the next chapter if I didn’t understand. No pressure, just dedicate an hour to it and don’t do any other activity, even if you don’t grasp anything at all. Even more, I decided to optionally read another technical book before bed. For nighttime reading, I chose to pick only topics I was interested in from the contents page. Then, in one moment, I realized where I kept getting stuck: “You can’t finish technical books the way you finish a programming course.”

There is always some sort of topic ordering by authors to maintain flow. I tried to follow their sequence, even though I knew other options existed. Authors usually mention there is no universal order to read the book for people like me, but I skipped this advice, convincing myself, “This tip is probably for seasoned developers who already know some of these topics. I’m not at that level.”

The right approach that connected everything was using technical books like a dictionary. I remember when my elder brother, still in school, bought an English-Uzbek dictionary and passionately decided to calculate how many words it would take to learn 70,000 words in a year. He made a rule to learn 200 words per day, starting from the letter A. Do you know what? He still doesn’t know English. Knowing this, I repeated his mistake for over four years. Therefore, I also have no exceptional talent for understanding everything in one go.

You need to read consistently but not only in a linear way. Instead, by reading with passion or interest, you eventually grasp things much faster. I don’t know where you’re from, but if you were also super happy as a child when you saw a table full of delicious things left after guests departed, you can understand the pattern much easier: You start by eating the most expensive things on the table (like cakes, chocolate sweets, or exclusive fruits, depending on the country), otherwise your mom picks them up for other guests. Then you eat delicious but less expensive things, like a meal that might go bad if you don’t eat it today. Then salads, healthy fruits, and eventually, you empty the entire table without any waste.

If you’re working on a project, you can read topics like eating a meal that might go bad if you read it later. In a project, you’ll have actual time to implement what you’ve learned and see its advantages. Otherwise, the “expensive foods” trigger you to get up and play around with what’s mentioned in the book. After some time, you’ll find no new things in those hot topics, and less interesting topics start to look appealing to learn because of internal curiosity. Less interesting topics are less intimidating due to a lack of context where you’ve seen similar implementations before, and they take longer to master.

Lastly, even if you don’t understand the most interesting topic, it’s okay. You can try again another day. I still search for the meanings of some ordinary English words I’ve mastered before, and it’s not a big worry. Using technical books for your benefit shouldn’t be different. You can always refer to them whenever you need. Just don’t get trapped by thinking you should learn this systematically. Don’t be me.
